---
layout: page
title: History
nav_order: 2
---

[Fred](https://worldofspectrum.org/archive/software/games/fred-investronica-sa)
is one of the first video-games created in Spain for the Sinclair ZX
Spectrum microcomputer. It was developed in 1983 by [Carlos
Granados](https://amstrad.es/doku.php?id=programadores:carlos_granados_charlie),
[Fernando Rada](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fernando_Rada) and [Paco
Men√©ndez](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paco_Men%C3%A9ndez) under the
[Indescomp, S.A.](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indescomp) label, with
cover art by [David Rowe](https://www.davidrowe.net/). It was
published by Quicksilva in the United Kingdom in 1983, almost
simultaneously with Bugaboo (The Flea), and was released by
[Investronica, S.A.](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Investr%C3%B3nica)
in Spain the next year.

A conversion for the Amstrad CPC, written by the same team including
[Camilo Cela](https://www.devuego.es/bd/fdesarrollador/camilo-cela),
was launched by [Amsoft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amsoft) as
[Roland on the
Ropes](https://www.cpcwiki.eu/index.php/Roland_on_the_Ropes) in 1984,
as part of the
[Roland](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roland_(game_character)) video
game series.

The history of Fred starts when Carlos Granados played the game
[Pengo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pengo_(video_game)) at an arcade
during the summer of 1983. In Pengo the player controls a penguin that
must move or destroy ice blocks in a maze to kill enemies and find the
exit. At the beginning of each level the maze [is generated
randomly](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6q3bNHvj92c) in front of the
user. Carlos, who had just graduated high school and was about to
start his Physics degree, was fascinated by the maze generation, and
challenged himself to write a similar algorithm in his Sinclair ZX81
computer. He quickly completed it, and had the idea that the random
maze could be used for a video-game.

After his summer vacation Carlos got together with his friends,
Fernando and Paco, and they set the basis for the game: the goal would
be to exit the maze; the main character would be an adventurer, like
Indiana Jones, with a gun to fight the enemies; and the setting, a
pyramid. They completed the game for the ZX Spectrum in just a few
weeks. And less than one month after that they finished the Amstrad
CPC version, which would be released under the name "Roland on the
Ropes".

Fred received very positive reviews by the specialized press. Crash
Magazine ([issue 3, p84](Crash03-Apr84-p84.pdf)) gave it a score of
83%, noting *"The game has great animation, especially that of Fred
himself, and the graphics are generally excellent. Even Fred's
revolver recoils when it is fired"*. Your Computer ([April 1984
issue](YourComputer_1984_04-p59.pdf)) gave it 4 out of 5 stars, and
described it as a *"feast of Disneyesque graphics"*. Your Spectrum
([issue 3, p70](YourSpectrum03-May84-p70.pdf)) scored it
8 out of 10. And it got a 100% score on Home Computing Weekly ([issue 52,
p22](Home_Computing_Weekly_052-p22.pdf)).

After Fred, its authors founded the game studio Made in Spain and the
distributor Zigurat. They produced a long list of games for 8 and 16
bit platforms, and even a few arcade titles.
